This week on the podcast, I have another
extra special guest. Drew Warshaw is
candidate for New York State controller.
The Democratic primary is June. That
really is the whole shooting match.
Fascinating person. Helped rebuild the
World Trade Center. Background in solar
and alternative energy, affordable
housing, uh worked for the Port
Authority. I thought this conversation
about the New York State pension and the
role of the controller was fascinating
and I think you will also with no
further ado my conversation with New
York State controller candidate Drew
Wshaw.
Drew Wshaw, welcome to Bloomberg.
>> Thank you, Barry. Thanks for having me.
I I'm really excited to talk to you
because of not just your background, but
some of your ideas about uh the New York
State pension plan, nearly $300 billion.
It's one of the biggest in the
countries. We'll get to that in a bit. I
have to start out asking you a little
bit about your background. Uh you get a
bachelor's in history and government
from Cornell, your MBA from Columbia
Business School. Yes.
>> What what was the original career plan?
Uh the original path was public service.
Uh so that's I started my career in
government. I worked for a governor many
governors ago. Um and then uh moved up
to Albany um and worked for that
governor. And then when that governor
resigned uh his name was Elliot Spitzer
um which you may have remembered.
>> Sure.
>> Uh the this was 2008. This was the same
week Bear Sterns went down which I'm
sure you remember. And um I had to get
back to New York City where I'm from and
um the Port Authority was rebuilding the
World Trade Center at the time and the
World Trade Center was still a 16acre
hole in the ground.
>> I I remember there was a whole lot of
dysfunction and arguing with the person
who had originally owned the property.
I'm forgetting the name of
>> Larry Silverstein.
>> That's right. Silverstein. I mean, this
went nowhere. It felt like, oh, they're
never going to rebuild this. This is
going to be a horrific thing for New
York City. Tell us a little bit about uh
your involvement in going from a
dysfunctional
government entity to something a little
more resilient.
>> Sure. So, I was blessed to become the
chief of staff to the head of the Port
Authority New York and New Jersey and
this was 7 years after the attacks and
it was still a 16acre hole in the ground
and to your point it was peak government
dysfunction. Um, everyone was worrying
with everyone. There was a private
developer. There were insurance
companies. There was unfortunately the
families of of nearly 3,000 victims. And
there was one of the most complicated
engineering and construction projects in
the most congested area of New York City
while two mass transit systems had to
continue operating. The one train that
bisects the site and the path system
that comes in from the Hudson River. And
we got there in 2008 and it was
basically a hole in the ground at that
point. and they called it the pit if if
you remember uh down at ground zero and
over the next four years we got it built
um and we opened the memorial memorial
by the 10-y year anniversary we secured
uh NAS uh as an anchor tenant for one
world trade center we ended up
renegotiating the original real estate
deal with Silverstein Properties and
rationalized the commercial development
and the financing of that project to
phase it in over time um given where we
were in the market at the time. So just
experience of a lifetime, especially for
a lifelong New Yorker, to have an
opportunity to rebuild my hometown.
There's really nothing like it.
>> And what's fascinating and and really
relevant for today's circumstance is how
lower Manhattan, which was never much of
a residential area, very much
transformed into a uh not quite Brooklyn
Heights, but a very uh residential
friendly, a whole lot more apartments
and condos and co-ops. Uh, I wonder if
that's a little bit of um a template for
moving forward now that we seem to have
60 70% rates of return to office.
>> Yeah. And much much more mixed use to
your point. I mean, no one no one would
recognize lower Manhattan today where
where it was, you know, in 2000 or in
the 90s. And I live in lower Manhattan
with my two boys and my wife, not far
from the World Trade Center, just given
the importance that it has in my life.
Um, and it's an incredible area. I think
it's, you know, the connectivity, the
mass transit, you know, you're close to
Brooklyn, you can get uptown anytime you
want or out of the city. Uh, it's
extraordinary.
>> So, not only have you worked inside
government at the Port Authority, but
you've worked for a Fortune 250 energy
company, you've worked on affordable
housing in the US. Tell us a little bit
about your business experience. Yeah.
So, I was blessed to one get to help
rebuild the World Trade Center and work
in one of the most extraordinary
government agencies that exists and got
to do it at a very young age. And so, I
had this extraordinary experience where
I had the opportunity to either keep
going vertical and keep going up uh
within government or build out. And, you
know, I bet that life is long. Um if
it's not, we're sort of in trouble
anyway. And so, you know, for my part,
uh, when I do things, I want them to be
meaningful and transformational. To do
that, I think you need experience and
you need to broaden your foundation and
not just build on high. Um, so I pivoted
out of government. I went to business
school as you mentioned and then joined
a Fortune 250 power company that was
trying to build a renewable energy
investment platform and development
platform. um and fortunately was led by
a very visionary CEO at the time who saw
the green revolution coming, wanted to
make sure that the the power company was
positioned for that and brought in a
bunch of different people, some with
power and and finance experience, some
with engineering experience and then you
know others like me who just were good
at solving complicated problems. Um and
together we built a really strong
renewable energy business.
>> And let's talk a little bit about
housing. Um, we in the United States
have a shortage of single family homes,
of starter homes, and then just
generally affordable homes. How bad is
the housing problem in New York City?
Uh, and and in the entire country,
>> it it's as bad as it gets. Um, but I
think importantly, and your your last
point is spot on, this is not just a New
York City problem. It is not just a city
problem. It is an everywhere problem.
And when I left the renewable energy
industry and just to give you a sense,
um this was late 2019. I was at my
teenth ribbon cutting for however many
solar farms that we had built. And it's
an extraordinary thing to uh to be at a
solar farm to see the sun shining on
basically three pieces of equipment,
clean electrons going into the grid, and
you're sort of like this is a miracle.
We we figured this out. We we just need
a battery. We we need an extension cord
and we've got this. But what you you
don't have in that farm in a field
somewhere is people. And I'm a New
Yorker and I'm a state and local guy at
heart. And the affordability crisis was
mushrooming around me. And I just felt
like I needed to do something that
impacted a person's day-to-day life as
opposed to trying to save the species,
which we need to do. Uh and climate
change is real. But for my part, the
home is the centerpiece of a good life.
And if you have a good one that provides
safety and security and value,
everything else opens up. And if you
have a home that is the opposite of
those things, or if you don't have a
home, um, then things close down on you.
And so we have, I think, the the the the
most serious domestic policy uh crisis
uh in this country is the fact that
people cannot afford their own home. My
kids my kids uh go to public school
downtown in lower Manhattan. One out of
every single one out of every seven
public school students in New York City,
they don't go home at night because they
don't have one.
>> That's unbelievable.
>> They are homeless. And when I'm sitting
there co-CEO of the most extraordinary
affordable housing nonprofit in the
country, 1100 dedicated professionals
who were there to address the affordable
housing crisis. And it occurs to me,
Barry, that we were losing. We were
getting smoked. It wasn't even close.
And I look over to a government that we
are trying to make faster, better,
cheaper, and more efficient. And they
have all this power and they have all
this money. And we could use those
things to address this raging
affordability crisis. And that's sort of
what turned me on to doing, you know,
what we'll talk about, I'm sure, because
I was not someone who grew up, you know,
wanting to run for office. I was sort of
the operator, the heads down person
behind the person. Um, but I got to the
point where I realized that the cavalry
is not coming. The cavalry is us. So, so
let's stay with housing for a bit. Uh,
we're going to talk a lot about the
controller position and and really what
the main focus of that is, but I'm just
fascinated by the housing circumstance.
Starting with really since the financial
crisis, we've underbuilt single family
homes. to say nothing of affordable
homes. So just in terms of demographics,
depending on whether you believe the
realators, the economists, or the
builders, we're 2 3 4 million homes
short. That's right.
>> Relative to 330 something million
Americans, that is very likely over the
next 25 years to be 350, 360, 370. Uh so
so given that and given you have federal
rules, you have state rules, you have
private sector rules, you have local
city and and county and town rules. What
can we do to improve the housing
situation? What should we be doing at
each of those levels?
>> Yeah. So we have a massive under supply
problem, a a supply demand uh imbalance.
And you know, whether it's 2 million,
whether it's 7 million, it's too many
million uh homes short. And people feel
that every day, whether it's in their
rent or in home prices. And what we saw
at Enterprise Community Partners, which
is the affordable housing nonprofit that
I worked for, as to your point, at every
single level, it is virtually impossible
to build a home that people can afford.
And I thought citing a solar farm was
difficult and you get push back. try
citing an affordable property. Um, and
there's so many layers of bureaucracy
and whether it's from the financing
side, the capital structures of these
affordable properties, you needed to
coder ring to figure them out. They are
so complex. Um, the building code and
you know that I think is the silent
killer of affordable housing in this
country. We talk a lot about zoning and
that is also an issue. Um, but what gets
uh talked about much less is even if a
piece of land is perfectly zoned, it is
still hard to get the math work because
the minute you hit dirt, particularly in
New York with the complexities of the
building code and the goldplated nature
and the outdated and so on and so forth,
it it is it is a fortune to build. So
whether it's the cost of construction or
the cost of capital um and the cost of
land, you have so many different things
working against you. And those are some
of the roadblocks that we need to start
clearing. H
>> how significant is the nimi not in my
backyard issue that once people are
established and they have a home. Hey,
we don't want uh affordable housing. We
don't want um section 8 housing in our
area, you're going to send property
values down. How legitimate are are
those concerns and how can they be
addressed? Yeah, you have this
incredible dynamic in this country where
the incumbents of home ownership are
actually economically incented in theory
to not allow greater supply because just
if we're in a supply demand world, if
the supply goes up uh and demand stays
constant, the value of their underlying
property either will sort of rest in a
neutral position or potentially go down.
And so there is just this literal
economic self-interest to not want to
allow more homes into your neighborhood.
And then there's cultural things and
there's all sorts of other crossurrens.
Um it is a big problem. Um and
unfortunately what we've seen is if you
actually study this and you look at what
happens when you introduce new supply of
homes, what you don't see is home values
plunging. You don't see, you know, wild
traffic jams or the schools getting
filled up. You see a a balance because
these things can't come online all at
once anyway. They are phased in over
over time. And a place will naturally
adjust to the inflow of new homes and
new people. And I think much too made
much too much is made from a very small
but very loud group of people who to
your point say not in my backyard. So,
let's talk a little bit about the
controller position. Um, most people
don't really know what this role is.
We're going to go into a lot of details.
Uh, but essentially this is one of the
most significant financial roles uh in
the state. their regular audits and
oversight of all sorts of tax and
spending revenue as well as overseeing
uh the New York State pension fund which
is almost $300 billion. I think it's the
third largest in the country. Is that
right?
>> That's right. That's right.
>> So, so tell us a little bit about this
role.
>> Yeah. You know, everyone's heard of the
governor. Everyone's heard of the
attorney general. Well, there's a third
statewide position in New York and it's
the New York State Controller. And you
know, put simply, the state controller
is the state's chief financial officer,
chief auditor, and chief investment
officer of the third largest fund in the
United States of America, all rolled up
into one job. One one person has all
three of those responsibilities. So,
it's an extraordinarily powerful
position. Unfortunately, too few New
Yorkers have ever heard of it. and the
ones who have can barely pronounce the
title. So, we need to do a lot more to
educate the public on the awesome
responsibility and authority of this one
office. And part of the challenge has
been it's been occupied by the same
person in the same seat for 18 years.
Wow.
>> Uh who has stayed well below the radar
and unfortunately I think is is sort of
treating the position like a lifetime
appointment. And we have, as I
mentioned, you know, being uh, you know,
focusing on the affordable housing
crisis, we have a position that is
sitting on all this power and all this
money and not not and is not being
flexed for the people without it. And I
think if we could get in there with
energy and surround oursel with talent,
we have all the levers we need to
address so many of the crises that we
face.
>> Huh. So, so I'm fascinated and I bet a
lot of our audience is fascinated by we
don't really think about New York State
pension. My wife is a teacher. I have
friends who are police and fire people.
Um, uh, state hospital doctors and and
emergency room nurses. There are just a
whole run of people that benefit from
the New York State pension. Um, tell us
a little bit about what's going on on
that pension. uh $300 billion is that's
real money.
>> Yeah. So, let's be clear, every New
Yorker is impacted by this pension fund.
So, one to to your point, there are
nearly 1.25 million beneficiaries. These
are public school teachers. These are
firefighters. These are cops. These are
frontline government workers. So, they
are directly impacted. But who funds the
public pension fund? Don't
>> they kick in taxpayers? They do. they do
kick in a portion, but taxpayers pay the
overwhelming amount of the contributions
into the pension fund. So, your property
taxes and your state income taxes, they
are taxed and all 11 million New York
tax filers pay into our public pension
fund. So, everyone is impacted. And
what's so extraordinary is this is not
only the third largest public pension
fund in the United States, but it's run
by one person. He is the sole trustee of
this fund. meaning
>> there's not an investment committee and
a lot of
>> he does not he does not report to a
board of trustees. The New York City
controller reports to five different
fiduciary boards, right? He he he he
>> who are those five boards?
>> It's currently uh uh there's the
teachers, there's the firefighters and
cops, there's the public employees and
and so on and so forth.
>> The state uh controller reports to
himself. He is the board. He is
literally the chief investment officer.
He is the fiduciary. he runs this money.
>> So should there be a board of trustees
the controller as head of the pension
fund reports to? How how do you propose
changing that structure?
>> Yeah, I think so. Just to be clear, only
one other controller nationally has that
level of sole trusteeship, that
authority. That's Connecticut, which is
a much a much smaller fund. And I think
corporate governance is so critical
here. I think um a board structure makes
so much sense, but we have to get that
board structure right. And one of the
challenges and and this is, you know, I'
I've looked at sort of best practices
across the country. One of the
challenges of these public pension funds
is their boards are political
appointees. And so you get into a
situation where, you know, the governor
gets an appointment and the state senate
majority leader and the assembly and so
on and so forth. And so now you have
this board that you hope is accountable,
but in in many ways you've actually
diffused accountability away from a
person who's publicly elected, at least
they have a job interview every four
years uh and have to come up to a sort
of anonymous unknown board that sort of
operates where wherever they operate and
are politically appointed. So I think
you know moving to a board structure to
me on its face makes perfect sense.
There is way too much concentrated power
in one human. But if it becomes a
politicized board, I think we have a
problem. So I think we have to to move
in that direction, but we have to do
that thoughtfully and carefully.
>> Really interesting.
>> Let's talk a little bit about this role
that so many New Yorkers either don't
understand or don't even think about.
You mentioned attorney general and
governor. Everybody knows those titles.
Tell us a little bit about the important
powers of the New York State Controller.
Yeah, I think what is extraordinary and
unfortunate is we have a position in
government that is sitting on all this
power and all this money and it is not
being used for people without it. And
what do I mean? New Yorkers cannot
afford to live in New York right now. We
have a massive affordability problem,
not just housing, anything, electricity
bills, insurance, and so on and so
forth. And there is a person up in
Albany whose job it is is to address
things like that. Although unfortunately
I don't think he he understands that or
knows that. And so I want to take this
position and I want to use the massive
levers of power and massive levers of
money and help address the raging cost
crisis and affordability crisis of New
Yorkers. And I think we can do that
whether it is managing the public
pension fund in a very different way.
And I'm sure we'll talk about that.
Absolutely. the incredible audit powers,
the fact that this person could audit
anything that touches a state tax
dollar. A quarter of a trillion dollars
gets spent every single year in New York
and he has an all access pass to being
able to audit any of that spending,
which is basically the ability to audit
anything. Um, and then, uh, what is not
well known is that the New York State
Controller also oversees this thing
called the New York State Unlaimed Fund,
which is all which is where all of our
money, our uncashed checks, our, you
know, health insurance uh, benefits that
don't somehow find their way to our
mailbox gets gets, you know, goes up.
>> That's a pretty decent chunk of money,
isn't it?
>> It turns out it is. It should be zero
because it's New Yorker's money and it
is the state controller's job to give it
back to New Yorkers. But it is $20
billion. There's $20 billion in the New
York State Unlaim Fund. When the
controller was appointed 18 years ago,
that number was only seven billion. And
by the way, that's still too high. And
so that is a rare thing to be able to
quantify the performance of an elected
official sort of how do you do that?
Especially with like a senator or an
assemblyman or is it how many bills that
they sponsor, but what if the bills are
bad bills or what if they're in the
minority and they don't get passed? This
is something in the job remitt in the
description that a fund that is supposed
to go down has nearly tripled in size
and it's New Yorker's money. In the
middle of an affordability crisis, this
guy is sitting on $20 billion of our
money.
>> So, let me let me defend the sitting New
York controller, gentleman named Tom
Denapoli. He's been in the job for
almost two decades. His reputation is
he's a steady technocrat. He's done some
audits. He's found some waste and
savings. It's not like he's, you know,
doing nothing. Um, what do you credit
him doing right? And and where do you
think the biggest areas he's fallen
short? Sure. Well, look, I think um and
this is not nothing and he he leads with
this. Now, my problem is uh this is a
problem if this is your reason for
running. And what he says is he has
never been indicted and he's never been
in a sex scandal.
>> Now in New York, that's a pretty big
thing. Elliot Spitzer stepped down. Lots
of other public officials in New York
have had a step down and this predates
me too by a long time.
>> Yeah. For my part though, the bar has to
be a bit higher than that.
>> So no sex scandals is not just the
minimum.
>> I I don't think that could be the the
definition of success in a position of
this consequence. And unfortunately that
is what we have heard. So look I I I I I
I think he is not corrupt. Um I don't
know of any sex scandal. Uh but we have
to be doing more. And you asked some of
the things that he could be doing more
of. I think the way he has managed the
$300 billion public pension fund has
amounted to malpractice. I think it has
cost New Yorkers and you know we'll talk
about this nearly $60 billion dollar of
extra taxes that have come out of our
pocket and literally just been
vaporized. Um, so I think whether it's
the public pension fund, the fact that
he hasn't been able to get $20 billion
of New Yorkers back into their pockets
in the middle of an affordability
crisis, or the way he focuses the audit
authority, not going after the things
that matter most to New Yorkers and
instead spreading his staff and diluting
his staff over thousands and thousands
of audit audits. And if you audited
2,000 things every single year, it is
very difficult to get to the root cause
of any one of them. And so I think just
even the level of focus and we could
talk about some of the ideas and some of
the areas that I would audit um just
need to be fundamentally more focused
and when you run large organizations or
large businesses or even large
government agencies resources are finite
at the end of the day and you need to
understand that and you need to
concentrate those finite resources on
the things that matter most. So, let's
talk about the New York State pension
fund, nearly $300 billion.
You've uh taken to standing by the Wall
Street charging bull with a giant check
for $21 million that you say is how much
the fund is wasting every week. So,
that's $1.1 billion a year in fees.
>> Yes.
>> Um we'll we'll dive into that. I'm just
curious, what sort of reaction do you
get from people down by the bull on Wall
Street?
>> Yeah. So, uh, Drew, I think Drew forny
is is what you're talking about in terms
of
>> And by the way, it's lower Broadway near
Wall Street,
>> right? So, uh, if you go to Drew forny
on Instagram or X or whatever social
channel, you will see what Barry is
talking about. But every single Friday,
which is payday, which is when New
Yorkers get paid, I go down to the Wall
Street Bull and I call
>> I don't know what we can say on this
podcast. You can say whatever you want.
>> Okay. I call bullsh
>> on the fact that our New York State
controller for the last 18 years has
given 1.3 billion dollar in fees to
hundreds of Wall Street bankers who
fundamentally didn't do their job, who
did not beat the market net of their
fees. They did not even come close. In
fact, they underperformed his own market
benchmarks by 39% and got 11.3 billion
in fees. And we got this all off of the
controllers and
>> is that how you got to 50 plus billion
dollars was the underperformance.
>> The underperformance would have uh had
to be made up by taxpayers. Now, the
state controller walks around and he
goes, you know, I've done a really good
job. Why? Because the public pension
fund of New York is one of the best
funded in the nation. And he's right. It
is. But he doesn't tell you why.
>> It's funded through tax is tax.
>> It's funded because 11 million New York
taxpayers over the last 18 years paid
59.1 billion in extra property taxes and
extra state income taxes to make certain
it was fully funded. It was the
taxpayers that ensured that, not the
stewardship of the investment fund
because it is New York state law for the
public pension fund to be fully funded.
Mickey Mouse could be the state
controller and it must be. The question
is how? How is it funded? Is it through
the investment income and the returns if
you're doing your job or is it through
taxpayers subsidizing the
underperformance? And that's what we
found, Barry. We found that $59.1
billion of additional taxes, what we
call the dapoli tax, h has had to
subsidize that 39% underperformance over
the last 18 years.
>> So, so I live in Nassau County, which I
think is like the third or fourth
highest property tax in the country. Are
you telling me that my taxes are higher
because the New York State pension fund
is not even getting market beta? Is that
what I'm to understand?
>> That is exactly the case. You understand
this perfectly. And that is the direct
connection between this job and people.
And that's just one of the direct
connection between this job and everyday
New Yorkers lives. On Long Island last
year, 10 of the 13 towns on Long Island
blew through their property tax cap. The
reason they blew through it is because
Tom Denoli did not do his job. It's
because he underperformed the market.
And we are sending billions of dollars
of property taxes, $1.1 billion last
year alone or $20 million every single
week, every single payday alone in fees
to a bunch of bankers who fundamentally
did not do their job. And if you and I
didn't do our job for 18 straight years,
what would happen to us? We'd be fired.
And these guys continue to get paid and
paid and paid. So, let let's talk a
little bit about what that pension fund
should look like. And full disclosure,
I've testified at various um state
pension funds. Um I've made the argument
actually it was about uh a dozen years
ago to the Connecticut pension fund that
they should move away from high-priced
alts and just simplify. What do you
think we should do with this $300
billion pension fund? How should it be
positioned? So the state controller
right now pays 664
different investment managers to
actively invest the fund and their
promise is we will beat the market net
of our fees and as we've established
they have not even come close and what I
would do is I would replace those 60 664
investment managers with a diversified
set of lowcost index funds to your point
let's not pay all these fees for
something that they have been unable to
do over the last 18 years and let's take
the market return. Let's focus on asset
allocation. To be very clear, that
matters. You know, whether it's between
89 or 93.4% of a portfolio's return will
be driven by your asset allocation. So,
let's spend our time and resources on
getting that right and making sure that
asset allocation matches the do the job
description of the fund, right? And
asset allocation can look very different
depending on what that fund needs to do,
the liquidity needs, and so on and so
forth. So, let's focus on that. Once we
do that, the picking and choosing of the
underlying securities and so on and so
forth, to me, I think that's a losers
game, as one person famously said it.
Um, and I think we should save taxpayers
their money in the form of these fees
and we'd earn a better rate of return
for the pension and we'd be able to
lower property taxes in the process.
>> Right. the the data on active managers
beating their benchmark. And to be fair,
um a big chunk due every year, but it's
just about half, usually a little less
each year. Over time, that drops to
about 20% over five years, 10% over 10
years, and over 20 years it's virtually
nobody. You know, the handful of names,
Warren Buffett, Peter Lynch, etc. But
the vast majority, vast vast majority
don't. Um, what sort of response do you
think you would get from Wall Street who
is very happy to collect uh big fees on
underperforming funds? And and again, to
be fair, there is a substantial chunk of
fund managers that do great each year.
>> It's just really hard to pick them
consistently over time.
>> And that's the thing. Um, so one, the
response that I've gotten from people
who understand finance and investments,
no one could possibly understand how
someone could hire 664 different
investment managers. Effectively, he's
bought the most expensive index fund in
the world with the worst tracking error.
And that's basically what he has done,
right? And with a lower sharp ratio than
than the market. So you're getting a
worst riskadjusted rate of return and
you underperforming the market by 39%.
So it's like on every possible level
this this thing is not performing. And I
am not here to say you know we can
debate active management versus passive
management. What I am here to say is for
purposes of a $291 billion fund that is
managed by a bunch of folks in Albany. I
do not believe that fund should or needs
to try to pick the pickers and to
somehow be the ones who frankly I think
are would be arrogant enough to think
that they know how to choose these folks
and they have 664 of them. So I don't
know how selective you could be by
basically hiring everyone anyway.
>> Hey, someone has to be pretty good in
that group.
>> Right. Exa Exactly. But how do I know
which one? And I'm not arrogant enough
to think I do.
>> So here's the push back. Um and I've I
have this discussion on the regular but
the push back is well we could be
concentrated in any one index or any
group of indexes but we want
non-correlated returns and we want the
potential to outperform the market. So
when we go to venture capital or private
equity or um private credit or uh real
estate investments, it allows us to
withstand whatever the market or the
economy throws at us because these are
so non-correlated and they give us the
chance to outperform the market. When
you buy an index, all you're going to
get is the market.
>> Yeah. Sure. So I guess a couple things
on that. one I think I I think you know
diversification matters so you know
that's back to asset allocation
absolutely we need to be thoughtful
about diversifying we need to be
thoughtful about you know idiosyncrasies
and trying to find those non-correlative
asset classes but to me the the idea
that we should put our money in a bunch
of private asset classes to basically ex
you know perform an exercise in
volatility washing just because they may
not have to mark tomarket their
valuations the way you know every split
second in the public markets we know
exactly what an asset is worth in terms
of that value discovery and price
discovery to me that is not that that
can't be the reason we are putting our
money in private asset classes we can
deal with volatility in the mechanics of
the contribution rates and you know look
back periods and smoothing mechanisms
and and things like that but let's not
that let's not have that be the reason
we put our money in private asset
classes. If there are idiosyncratic
opportunities, if there are ways to
diversify within the context of a
private market, I am open to that. But
what I am not open to is the idea that
just because it's somehow in private
equity, the laws of physics and gravity
of the economy are not impacting the
underlying assets simply because the
ownership model looks different. Right?
I mean, to me, that doesn't mean that
we've diversified. It just means we've
changed the ownership structure. Not not
and if we can if we can diversify. I
would love to have that conversation and
we could get the benefits of those
idiosyncrasies then great. Like I I I
truly am open to that conversation. But
to me it can't simply be because we're
going to wash away the volatility
because that is a terrible reason to
make investments.
>> That that volatility washing. Uh you're
channeling Cliff Asesses of AQR. um he
he's the one who's championed that
phrase more than anybody else and he's a
quant and and an active manager and he
says uh if you're putting things into
privates just so you don't have to do
quarterly reporting you're you're you're
probably paying too much in fees and
you're probably giving up uh too much in
terms of uh future returns.
>> Yeah, it's a bad reason right and again
in the context of a pension fund we
could deal with volatility. I appreciate
and I'm sensitive to the liquidity needs
to ensure benefit payouts, but we can do
those things outside the context of our
investment choices. We could do that in
the context of the mechanics of how the
pension fund is funded and smoothing
mechanisms and averaging and so on and
so forth. We don't have to do it in the
in the actual job of investments. So, so
let's stay with that because it's really
a fascinating um way to think about
whenever I talk about uh perpetual funds
like a pension or a foundation. Uh they
have certain obligations. There's a
substantial payout every year. If you're
a tax exempt foundation, it's 5% at a
minimum. I think the pension fund pays
out a whole lot more than that each
year. Right.
>> That's right. Like 15 or 16 billion
dollars a year. Uh so uh that's that's
that's not a insubstantial chunk of
money. How do you think about and how
should whoever's running the New York
State pension fund think about the
future liabilities that fund has for
forever and what it means for asset
allocation? Does this mean we steer away
from uh illquid assets? Does this mean
we uh steer towards fixed income? H how
do you think about that asset allocation
model? I think it's it just needs to be
balanced and it needs to align and
reflect to the job description of the
fund. And you know, I was talking to a
chief investment off a former chief
investment officer of one of the largest
public pension funds in the United
States. And and he was the one who, you
know, who reminded me, you know, Drew,
what what is the job description of the
New York State public pension fund? What
does it need to do? [snorts] What are
what is the benefit stream that it needs
to pay out? what is the income stream
that is coming in whether it's from uh
uh the investment income or you know
public taxpayers and the you know
employers the 3,000 municipalities that
are paying into the public pension fund
that are funded by those property taxes.
So to me that is first principles and
for my part you know I think we
absolutely can be in areas that are less
liquid. We just need to have balanced
liquidity. We just need to ensure that
on the other hand we have pockets of the
portfolio that we know can perform or we
know can pay out and we know are highly
liquid and and fortunately in the
capital markets there are plenty of
asset classes that can provide that
liquidity. While some of our our assets
may be tied up and and you know can
either get whether it's some you know
illquidity premium or some other cash
flow characteristic that is useful again
for that broader job description of the
fund that has to pay out now but also to
your point is the ultimate long-term
investor. The state of New York is not
going away anytime soon. They are a
forever open fund and we need to have
that focus of and that balance of what
are our liquidity needs today and over
the foreseeable future. But how are we
investing to ensure that the the public
employees and the public school teachers
who just entered the workforce who are
teaching my two sons are are going to
have the benefits paid out you know 30
35 40 years from now. And for sure 90%
of the assets don't need to be uh liquid
each year, even if most of them will be.
It's less than 10% annually that has to
be paid out. Um what you're proposing uh
sounds radical, but I could look at
elsewhere around the country. I know
Kalpers made a shift a few years ago, 10
years ago, where they took a lot of
money away from not just underperforming
hedge funds, but even fairly
well-performing hedge funds that were
kind of pricey and rolled them into
index funds. And then very famously, the
Wall Street Journal did this somewhat
hilarious article about the head of a
Nevada pension fund. And it's one person
who is fully indexed and really goes in
uh answers some email, answers his own
phone, has lunch, and goes home. Yeah,
>> this isn't really radical what you're
proposing. This is Black Rockck. Half of
their $12 trillion is is passive or or I
should say indexed. Uh even more of uh
Vanguard's 11 trillion is indexed. This
is fairly state-of-the-art thinking.
>> If you want to use radical, it is
radical common sense. It is
[clears throat] the first day of
business school. You know, they gather
you around and they they say, "Come
close. We're going to we're going to
tell you a secret." It turns out it's
really, really hard to beat the market
net of fees. It's really hard to do that
over a long period of time. It's
especially hard to do that with a fund
size as big as $300 billion that just
wants to regress to the mean. And so,
focus on asset allocation. Think about
diversification. Think about that job
description. But once you do, don't
worry about the the the the the last 6%
or whatever it is. Uh which a lot of
people argue, you know, may not be
skill, could could be luck, could be a
lot of other factors. I don't need to
have that debate right now. For purposes
of the third largest public pension fund
in the United States of America, we
should not be trying to beat the market
and doing something that we can't
possibly do because it turns out over
the last 18 years, it has crushed
taxpayers in the process in the middle
of an affordability crisis. And what
we've seen, Barry, and what this
basically amounts to is our state
controller over the last 18 years has
overseen one of the largest wealth
transfers that no one knows anything
about. from ordinary taxpayers 59.1
billion dollars to hundreds of Wall
Street bankers who didn't do their job.
And if they were to do their job, if
they were to beat the market net of
fees, great. Then it's a win-win. Then
everyone wins. Then we are living in a
world in which we can have our cake and
we can eat it too. Um, but I live in the
real world. 19 million New Yorkers live
in the real world. It hasn't happened
over the last 18 years. And that's why I
think we need a fundamental change. So,
we've talked a bit about the pension.
Let's talk about some of the other um
roles within the New York State
Controllers's Office. You mentioned the
office does 2,000 audits a year.
What areas are they auditing? What's the
purpose of it? And how do you want to
change that? What areas do you think
they should be auditing but are not?
>> Sure. So their remit, their job jar is
they are allowed to audit anything that
touches a state tax dollar which if
anyone understands public finance is
basically everything because our taxes
go up to Albany and then they get
redistributed all across the state. So
he in theory is able to audit anything
he wants. Um these are audits I think
importantly to understand these are uh
not only financial statement audits uh
which they are uh they they do do those
but these are auditing the efficacy of
how our tax dollars are spent. Are they
spent well? Are they getting the results
that the legislature and these laws
intended? If not, how should we improve
them? So this is you know also not just
chief auditor but sort of chief
efficiency officer of the state of New
York. And one of the things that, you
know, and there are nearly 3,000
employees who work for the state
controller, which, you know, I I hear
and and that's that seems like a lot.
That seems like an extraordinary
resource to to be able to deploy over a
quarter of a trillion dollars of
spending. But when you dilute those
resources over thousands of different
audits and you don't focus your finite
resources, I think, on the things that
matter most, then you don't get to the
root cause of so many of the challenges.
>> Give us a few examples.
>> So, let me give you three. Let me just
give you three examples. And everyone,
you know, would would start with the
MTA. And of course, we're going to audit
the MTA. But
>> was the first thing I was thinking of is
why is it so expensive to build subway
or uh roads and and tolls and things
like that.
>> But one of the things and I want to get
to to some of the other things because
the state controller actually does audit
the MTA. And one of the things that I
would want to do is because there have
been so many audits of the MTA, I would
first initially just do an audit of the
audits. I would want to truly understand
what have been the findings, make sure
that those findings make sense and then
just simply cross reference to what have
they implemented and what are still
outstanding and like literally just
simplify it from that point and then we
can get in the weeds once you've gotten
smarter on that. But but for my part
before we like launch into some some new
MTA audit, there have been so many MTA
audits. Let's just understand what of
the findings have actually been
addressed and what what remain
outstanding. But I want to talk about
three audits, three things that I think
we should concentrate this authority on.
One is I think we we should audit the
Department of Financial Services. What
is the Department of Financial Services?
It turns out the State Department of
Financial Services is the largest
regulator of insurance companies in the
country. Insurance companies are not
regulated by the federal government.
They are regulated on a state-by-state
basis. And the Department of Financial
Services in the state of New York
happens to be the largest among them.
How are they doing? We have no idea
because we have never done a toptobottom
audit on the way in which they regulate
this massive sector of our of our
economy whose business model these days
seems to be to take our money and make
it really really hard to get it back.
Whether it's on the health side and the
health insurance, you know, uh uh
gauntlet that you have to run or in in
my old world in the housing world with
property insurance uh premiums
skyrocketing with deductibles going up,
you know, to the point where you
basically are self-insuring anyway. So,
you need to start asking, you know,
questions like that. We are going to get
to the bottom of this insurance industry
and we can from this position of of
state controller. a second area, the New
York State Public Service Commission and
the Department of Public Service,
another sort of mouthful of of
bureaucratic sounding things. Well, it
turns out this bureaucratic sounding
thing is the largest regulator of our
electric and gas utility monopolies.
This is the one thing that ensures that
these monopolies actually serve the
public interest. And I was in the
electricity business for eight years
building renewable energy power
infrastructure all across the country.
And I had to deal with these utility
monopolies. And these utility monopolies
are broken. And their regulator is not
doing anything about it. And what I
would do is go in and we would audit
their regulator. The one thing that's
standing in between the public interest
and these monopolies. Why aren't we
laser focused on that when electricity
rates are going up by double digits? I
was up in Rochester, New York, and
Rochester Gas and Electric, one of those
utility monopolies, proposed a one-year,
36%
increase to your electricity rates. That
is an admission of failure. That is
literally an admission that the company
in charge does not know what it is doing
and is not up to the task. We need to
fundamentally change the utility
business model. I think we can. Um, I
think there a financial incentive in
incentive structure that was built for a
hundred years ago, not for today and for
the next hundred years. And I think that
that would ultimately be good for
rateayers, good for consumers, and
fundamentally good for the investors and
the developers of these power
infrastructures in the in the first
place. And the third thing that I would
audit is I would audit the New York City
and New York State building code. And
people say, well, wait a minute, you can
audit agencies. You can't audit
something like the building code. But my
authority extends to anything that
touches a state tax dollar. And if you
had energy, imagination, and urgency,
you would recognize that the silent
killer of not just housing, but of
anything in this town or all across New
York State is the building code. This
thing kills projects before they start.
And it is goldplated and it is outdated.
And what I would do is propose a model
building code that we estimate will
strip 15% of the cost to construct
anything, not just housing, which
obviously I care a lot about, uh, and
New Yorkers need more of, but anything.
And I would literally do the audit would
be a track change version [snorts] from
the model building code to the existing
two codes that govern construction in
New York. and we would show precisely
what would need to be changed to get to
that lighter, simpler, easier and more
coste effective effectively to build
building code. We would do the work for
them and then we would go to the mayor
and we would go to the city council and
they have talked a lot about
affordability and we would say if you
were serious about this go adopt this
code and we would go to the governor and
the legislature and they talk a lot
about affordability as they should and
we would give them a concrete way to be
able to deliver that and that is how I
think we need to be thinking of
leveraging the power of this audit.
>> So is the code passed by a city or state
legislature or is it administratively
>> that's right? No, it's it's adopted by
the the city of New York and then the uh
basically rest of state the the the
state adopts a building code. Different
municipalities can add on, but that's
one of the challenges, Barry, is we
always add. We never subtract to these
things, right? And no one has done a
toptobottom audit of the thousands of
pages of code that drives up the cost to
to build anything. and and that's the
type of creativity and energy and
experience-driven audits that I think we
need to bring.
>> So, you're talking uh to a large degree
about making
this position
much more public, much more visible,
much louder than it's been. Um what
what's been going on with the incumbent?
Um I don't think most people and in fact
a data point that you've shared before
62% of Democrats don't know who he is.
20% of them view him favorably. This has
kind of been a stealth position. You're
really proposing
if not elevating this while certainly
making it much more visible and public.
Te tell us about that and and and your
thoughts in that space. Yeah, I mean
look, the job cannot be keeping the job.
That's not what this job is. And we are
in a moment where if you are sitting on
money and you are sitting on power and
you are not using that really, really
well, you have got to step aside. When
one out of every seven New York City
public school students do not go home at
night because they don't have one. And
you are sitting on the third largest
pool of public capital in the United
States of America. and none of that
money is invested in homes that people
can afford. By the way, while earning a
reasonable riskadjusted rate of return,
which is what we did for a living, then
that is a massive problem. And so, for
my part, the fact that no one has ever
heard of this office, is a problem. That
is not an asset of the last 18 years.
That is a massive liability. That is red
blinking lights that the fiscal watchdog
of the state of New York, no one has
ever heard of them. And if you were to
ask, if you were to make up a name and
you were to poll it, you know, it is
human behavior for at least one out of
every three people to say, "Yeah, yeah,
sure. I've heard of that person." And
so, the fact that 62% of New Yorkers and
New York Democrats have never heard of
this guy to me is an indictment of the
performance of this job. And in terms of
definitions of success, we need to
address this cost crisis. But after four
years, you better have heard of the New
York State controller, right? Because
that means we are actually using this
power and this money for the people who
don't have it.
>> So, so let's talk about some things that
I think have worked out pretty well. Um,
and they tend not to just to be New York
City or New York State programs, but
Port Authority and bigger programs. Um,
also as a lifelong New Yorker, uh, and
and a long time I lived in the city for
a long time, I I've been really
impressed with I think LaGuardia is
could be the best airport in the country
now. I know was that six or eight
billion dollars later. They should have
done it 20 years ago. Um, adding uh Penn
moving part of Penn Station to Grand
Central as well as the the new facility.
a a huge when the extension of the
Second Avenue subway. And then as I
drive around New York State, uh we seem
to be repaving everything. I know a big
infrastructure bill passed a couple of
years ago and the Long Island Expressway
and the Interstate uh 95, the New York
State throughway. And it seems
everywhere I look, new roads, new
bridges, new tunnels are are being laid.
Um, are these are we getting the best
bang for our buck with these projects?
And what other projects? Um, there's
talk about a very expensive project to
pro protect southern Manhattan from uh
climate change and and rising sea
levels. Uh, and I recall after Sandy,
there was just every supertorrm Sandy,
there was a brief discussion about, gee,
look at the towns that had buried power
lines. they didn't lose electricity as
opposed to half the state lost
electricity for two weeks or longer. Um,
how do we look at all these projects?
How do we manage the expenses of them?
Are we getting a bang for our buck on
any of these? Tell us about these big
public works projects. What what do you
see the next five or 10 years looking
like?
>> Sure. So, uh, the short answer is no. We
are not getting the best bang for the
taxpayer buck uh, in these projects. And
there are any number of reasons why. I
talked about the building code as one of
those reasons. Another reason and and
you know I think listeners will
appreciate this is you look at the the
department of buildings and where are
their service level standards, right?
Where are their turn times? Where are
the things that they need to be doing to
ensure that the people out in the world
who are investing the capital and
putting that capital to use and all the
workers who are trying to build these
projects and build these infrastructures
uh the these these pieces of
infrastructure,
where are those service level standards?
You know, in in in the world that I used
to occupy, we would have service level
agreements, right? We the our
counterparty would have to perform based
on a number of different metrics. And
this is, you know, goes back to that
audit authority. These are the things
that the state controller can do both by
proposing those service level standards
and making sure that they are adopted.
And if they aren't adopted, that's okay.
We can we can still measure them anyway
and we can come back every single year
and see how they're doing. So the
department of buildings is one of those
places where again sort of projects go
to die and I think there there just is a
lack of discipline and focus around
metrics to just make sure that they are
doing their legally required job. You
should not have to hire an expediter to
have an expedited project. That seems to
be the
>> that's a layer of cost, right? That is a
layer of cost and a layer of friction
that basically admits that the status
quo makes no sense. And so we're going
to have this offramp for people who can
afford it and only those people who can
afford it and they will somehow get
special treatment. And to me that is
like the exact wrong thing and the wrong
direction. And we have to show that the
regular throughway works that you don't
need the Lexus lane that only certain
people can afford. And that's what where
we have to kind of pull pull government
back in that mindset that they should
just be able to do their core job.
>> So let's zoom out and ask you to imagine
four years or eight years into the job.
What does success look like? How do you
define being able to look back after a
term or two and saying this is where we
succeeded? This is this is how it should
be run.
>> Yeah, great question. So a few very
concrete examples. one, um, hopefully
property taxpayers and state income
taxpayers aren't bleeding because
they're paying a bunch of fees to a
bunch of bankers who just are not doing
their job. So, one, we have pivoted the
investment strategy away from that sort
of beat the market idea that has failed
utterly over the last 18 years and we
are moving away from that and we are
taking pressure off of taxpayers. that
is part of the cost crisis that we are
facing in New York and why New Yorkers
cannot afford to live here. So that's
one thing. Um the cost of housing, I
think the state controller has an
ability both on the capital side and on
the audit side to address it. We talked
about uh the audit side uh in terms of
of addressing this building code issue
and I hope that that can lower uh or at
least you know keep neutral the cost of
construction. Uh and on the financing
side, I think we could bend the cost
curve of the cost structure, the capital
structure, um and the cost of capital
for affordable housing by making
available and I propose the largest
housing fund in the United States of
America, a 10 billion housing fund to
invest in homes that New Yorkers can
afford. Definition of success that is
deployed in in what we estimate to be a
100,000 homes uh that that New Yorkers
can actually afford. That is something
that is absolutely concrete. And then
this $20 billion fund of New Yorker's
own money in the New York State Unlaim
Fund that we actually start getting that
money back. And you have to go to some
dopey website right now that is
complicated and hard to use. And if you
have money, they don't even tell you how
much because they don't even really want
you to get it back, right? It sounds
like you're trying to, you know, issue a
health insurance claim or something like
that. We are going to get rid of this
website. We are going to decommission
it. We won't have a website because we
won't need it because we're
automatically going to send New Yorkers
their money back because it's their
money. It is not Tom Dinapapolis. It is
not the state of New York's. It is New
Yorkers. We have your name. We have how
much you're owed. We have your last
known address. We have access to all the
data in the world. And we are in 2026.
My My phone knows more about my
personality than I do. My phone knows
where I live. Why can't we figure out
how to get you your money back
automatically? We can. And we will.
Drew, really interesting. Thank you so
much for coming in and I'm going to
extend an invitation to Tom Denapoli. If
you want to come to Bloomberg and talk
to us about um what you've been doing as
controller and what your plans are for
the future, we would love to have you.
I'm going to have my producer reach out.
Um [music]
really, really interesting stuff. Thank
you uh for a thoughtprovoking
conversation. We have been speaking to
Drew Warshaw. He is a candidate for New
York State controller in the Democratic
primary in June 2026.
If you enjoyed this conversation, well,
check out any of the 600 we've done over
the previous 12 years. You can find
those at iTunes, Spotify, YouTube,
Bloomberg, wherever you get your
favorite podcasts. I would be remiss if
I not thank our staff who helps me put
these conversations together each week.
Alexis Noriega is my video producer.
Shawn Russo is my researcher. Anna Luke
is my podcast producer. I'm Barry
Rhaltz. You've been listening to Masters
in Business on Bloomberg Radio.